8.10 What’s new (#3217)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/whats-new.asciidoc

> coming[8.10.0]
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

For example, you might choose to send notifications only if the alert is received between defined hours.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/conditional-actions.png[An example of the UI for triggering an action and alert, width=50%]

[discrete]
== See Host Details at Glance

> As part of our new beta:[] {observability-guide}/analyze-hosts.html[Hosts] experience, we have added a new overview tab in the host fly-out so you can quickly see the metrics, metadat, and alerts you need to see at a glance to help you investigate and resolve issues with your hosts quicker!

Author: ```suggestion
As part of our new beta:[] {observability-guide}/analyze-hosts.html[Hosts] experience, we have added a new overview tab in the host flyout so you can quickly see the metrics, metadata, and alerts you need to see at a glance to help you investigate and resolve issues with your hosts quicker!
```

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/wn-hosts.png[Analyze hosts view]

[discrete]
== KQL filtering for APM alerting rules

Version 8.10 introduces the capability to leverage Kibana Query Language (KQL) filters within the alerting rules for latency, failed transaction rates, and error counts. This enhancement significantly improves the versatility available to our users when formulating Application Performance Monitoring (APM) alerting rules.

[role="screenshot"]

> image::images/wn-kql.png[Analyze hosts view]

Author: ```suggestion
image::images/wn-kql.png[Analyze hosts view]

Ready to create an alert? See {kibana-ref}/apm-alerts.html[APM Alerts and rules] to learn how.
```

[discrete]
== Revamped dashboards for JVM and Node.js with new runtime metrics

> The dashboard for JVM runtime metrics has been revamped in version 8.10. The Portable Dashboards feature of Kibana has been leveraged for this purpose. Following additional JVM metrics are now available OOTB;

Author: ```suggestion
New in 8.10, the portable dashboard feature of Kibana has been leveraged to revamp our JVM runtime metrics dashboard. The following additional JVM metrics are now available out-of-the-box:
```

* Memory allocation rate
* Heap usage split by memory pools

Additional runtime metrics have also been introduced for Node.js. These metrics are:

* Heap usage (by Node)
* External memory usage
* No. of active requests
* No. of active handles
* Average event loop delays

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/wn-jvm.png[Analyze hosts view]

> Related links:

Author: ```suggestion
Learn more:
```

* Documentation: {apm-java-ref}/metrics.html#metrics-jvm[JVM runtime metrics]
* Documentation: {apm-node-ref}/metrics.html[Node.js runtime metrics]
* GitHub issue for the https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/144332[Kibana Portable Dashboards feature]
* GitHub issue for https://github.com/elastic/apm-dev/issues/1001[leveraging the portable dashboards feature for runtime metrics]

[discrete]

> == More integrations now using 70% less disk space to store metrics

Author: ```suggestion
== More integrations now use 70% less disk space to store metrics
```

The number of integrations leveraging {ref}/tsds.html[Elasticsearch's time series mode] has risen once again to include those we know are most important for your monitoring needs.

The only thing you need to do to get this important reduction in metrics storage is to upgrade your Elastic Agent integration to the latest version. A new TSDB index will be created and a roll over automatically applied without you having to do anything.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/wn-ds.png[Analyze hosts view, width=50%]

> The below integrations are now waiting for you to upgrade, efficiently store metrics and enjoy having them next to your logs in elasticsearch.

Author: ```suggestion
The below integrations are now waiting for you to upgrade, efficiently store metrics, and enjoy having them next to your logs in Elasticsearch.
```

|===

> |https://docs.elastic.co/integrations/activemq[ActiveMQ] |https://docs.elastic.co/integrations/apache-intro[Apache] |https://docs.elastic.co/integrations/aws[AWS] |https://docs.elastic.co/integrations/aws/billing[AWS Billing] |https://docs.elastic.co/integrations/aws/cloudwatch[AWS Cloudwatch] footnote:newin810[New in 8.10]

Author: ```suggestion
|https://docs.elastic.co/integrations/activemq[ActiveMQ] |https://docs.elastic.co/integrations/apache-intro[Apache] |https://docs.elastic.co/integrations/aws[AWS] |https://docs.elastic.co/integrations/aws/billing[AWS Billing] |https://docs.elastic.co/integrations/aws/cloudwatch[AWS Cloudwatch] footnote:newin810[Upgraded in 8.10]
```
